LeBron and Anthony Davis: The Scariest Duo of Them All
The pairing of Anthony Davis, left, and LeBron James on the Lakers has been just as formidable as everyone expected.
The pairing of Anthony Davis, left, and LeBron James on the Lakers has been just as formidable as everyone expected.Credit...Richard Mackson/USA Today Sports, via Reuters
Marc Stein
By Marc Stein
Nov. 6, 2019
DALLAS — I have lamented the various ills of the N.B.A.’s opening month plenty. It is time to give thanks for what happened on the first day of November: My press row seat at American Airlines Center made it feel as though I could reach out and touch the best game of the season so far.
The Los Angeles Lakers’ overtime victory last Friday night in Dallas was one of those instant classics. You had the Mavericks’ young-star tandem of Luka Doncic and Kristaps Porzingis jousting with what is looking more and more like the most formidable duo in a league full of them: LeBron James and Anthony Davis.
The reality is that a showdown of this magnitude, served up to a national ESPN audience, came too soon for Porzingis, the former Knick. He had played just six regular-season games after a 20-month absence. It’s way too soon to judge him; give Porzingis more time to regain the requisite confidence and zip in his legs to fly around the floor the way James, Davis and Doncic were.
Those three, by contrast, are ripe for judging, grading and outright fawning over.
Doncic looks like the most cocksure 20-year-old European import this league has seen. On the other side, James and Davis are meshing fantastically, even though almost everyone you speak to in Lakers circles is convinced that the offense is woefully behind where it will ultimately land because the team lost considerable practice time during its chaotic trip to China last month.
Marc Stein's Newsletter
Marc Stein has covered Jordan. He's covered Kobe. And LeBron vs. the Warriors. Go behind the N.B.A.'s curtain with basketball's foremost expert.
“For two weeks in, it’s not too bad,” said Danny Green, L.A.’s veteran swingman.
ImageDallas’s Luka Doncic, right, put on quite the show on Friday, but Danny Green, left, had the biggest play.
Dallas’s Luka Doncic, right, put on quite the show on Friday, but Danny Green, left, had the biggest play.Credit...Tony Gutierrez/Associated Press
With James as engaged defensively as we’ve seen him in years, combined with Davis’s ability to protect the rim, change shots and cover copious amounts of ground, Coach Frank Vogel awoke on Tuesday presiding over the league’s No. 1-ranked team defense. Early as it is to make too much of such statistics, it’s difficult not to be moved at least a little by the Lakers’ defensive rating when they’re allowing a mere 96.3 points per 100 possessions.
For all the rightful claims you could make about small sample sizes and knee-jerk reactions, if you offered me a choice today between the two L.A. teams and the field to win the championship, I would have to go with the Clippers-Lakers ticket.
She Hung Nooses on Halloween. What Happened Next Was Surprising.
To Make This Tofu, Start by Burning Toxic Plastic
Continue reading the main story
Health, as usual, will tell us a lot. If James and Davis can manage a regular-season total of games played in the 70s and enter the postseason (relatively) injury-free, no one will want to see these Lakers in the playoffs. Not even the Clippers.
There’s also every chance that the additional ballhandler Vogel so badly needs to ease LeBron’s playmaking burden and help create more shot opportunities for the Lakers’ role players could come from within.
Rajon Rondo (calf) hasn’t been healthy enough to play, but when you spend time around this team you hear over and over again how well he’s shooting the ball in practice. Everyone in Lakerland is eager to see how Rondo’s purportedly improving aim from the perimeter, at age 33, translates to real games. He’s certainly capable of addressing the playmaking void if his shooting doesn’t cause spacing issues.
Alex Caruso is another name of note in this discussion. His opportunities have been limited even with Rondo out, but some in the organization believe he has the potential to be a dangerous secondary ballhandler who shoots the ball well enough to keep defenses honest.
After six consecutive seasons out the playoffs for this franchise — which undoubtedly feels like 60 to an impatient fan base so accustomed to championship contention — there has been no tangible drama with this group.
The Lakers weathered injuries and travel chaos throughout a training camp that they hoped would go much smoother, but they’ve started well anyway.
How long will that last? Is the star duo’s joy only as enduring as its shared health? What happens if the Lakers lose out to the Clippers or Houston or someone else in the chase to add Memphis’s Andre Iguodala?
Those are all pertinent curiosities.
For now, though, there is little to question. James had 39 points, 16 assists and 12 rebounds on Friday night — two months away from his 35th birthday. Davis had 31 points and 8 rebounds and, combined with the resurgent Howard, snuffed Porzingis out of the game in the second half.
Doncic was dazzling with 31 points, 15 assists and 13 rebounds, despite a fourth-quarter laceration on the back of his head from a collision with Howard that required stitches. (The team insisted afterward that he did not have a concussion.) Yet it was King James and the Brow who left their foes with the deepest sense of dread.
The kind that comes from watching the budding union of two of the five best players in the world.
“With those guys on our team,” Green said, “I don’t think anyone around here panics.”